---
title: What Hackathons Teach About Making Products
---

I like hackathons. Hackathons are competitions that run over multiple days —
typically a whole weekend — and in which the participants — programmers and
designers — solve a challenge in order to win a prize. Typically, there are a
few challenges that are all based around some theme — blockchains,
sustainability, democracy, and so on.

<!--more-->

Not only are hackathons interesting because of the subjects that are covered in
the challenges, they also become an interesting study in startup archetypes.
The majority of participants are in some way affiliated with startups or
entrepreneurship in general, and everyone is represented fairly. From genius
backend programmers to brilliant product designers. From loud and obnoxious
brogrammers to people who don't know how they got here in the first place.

The teams that those individuals make up are equally interesting. There are
teams that diligently fulfill all the tasks in hackathon, only to create
something that not even they can fully understand or explain. There are teams
that create beautiful concepts for world-changing products, only to be unable
to answer how they'd implement it, when asked by jury. Some teams hit the nail
right on the head, and produce something that is well-designed and compelling.
Something that makes you think: _Why didn't I think of that?_

Of course, what all those teams have in common is their ability to produce
an enormous amount of output — code, design, concept, and so on — in a short
amount of time. Yet, the result is not always _good_. Or rather, just combining
a lot of skills won't create a whole that is greater than the sum.

When I read [The Lean Startup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Lean_Startup)
for the first time, I was impressed by the noble intentions of the author, Eric
Ries. He describes his approach to creating startups as one that _reduces
waste_. If you combine all the designer hours, developer hours, business
development hours and so on that accumulate during a hackathon, you would
expect only great results.

And at the same time, if we are not seeing great results, we are ultimately
faced with a lot of waste. Waste of energy that was needed to create failed
concepts, waste of energy to stay awake for more than 24 hours, as is typical
in a hackathon, waste of time that could be spent to get some well-deserved
rest before the daily work-life drudge starts again on Monday.

Of course when I talk about waste, I am not only talking about the specific
case of hackathons. They are an easy example to talk about, since they have a
very well specified deadline, clear evaluation criteria, and require a lot of
concentration in a very short time span. They become a case study in project
management and team interaction.

And if we successfully figure out how to make hackathons work, we can apply
this approach on a bigger scale. Hackathons become a way to understand how to
model project management in real companies as well.

But unlike most companies, hackathons have the potential to show how to make
project management work without complicated middle management. Management
rarely exists to make the job of employees easier, but mostly to protect the
company from their employees. Hackathons, on the other hand, give us a safe
space where we can experiment with new approaches without fear of repercussion.
After all, if our little weekend experiment fails, we will still walk away
having learned a great lot about what _doesn't_ work.

So let's head back to the drawing board and think about how to make great teams
that can build great products. But first, I would like to introduce some
constraints:

- We talk about product teams that contain only developers and designers;
- We create products that have well-defined target audiences and serve a
  specific purpose;
- We model our approach to not require a team lead, but will create an
  environment of shared responsibility and leadership.

Then, I would like to describe my ideal designer and developer. A designer
should have a broad range of skills in product and visual design. It's less
about mastering all skills, but having the ability to get the team to 80% done
in a short amount of time. Similarly, I would expect the developer to bring a
broad toolkit centered around web technologies and be particularly good at
understanding architecture constraints and quickly estimating the feasibility
of product ideas.

My impression at Hackathons so far was that the team with the most convincing
argument for why their product as a whole, when finished, will work has the
highest likelihood of winning. Simply creating a form with a few buttons that
randomly beeps when the presenter remembers to click the right sequence during
the product pitch is not enough. As a matter of fact, the prototype comes
secondary to the concept. The concept and the team's approach to implementing
it matter the most, as this is where the real money lies.

So for the next few weeks, I want to explore the following questions and come
to some kind of conclusion in the form of a hackathon product blueprint:

- How can I develop a strong product concept with market appeal?
- How can developers and designers work together in a complementary way?
- How can we share ownership and leadership equally?
