---
title: How to Fail in Just a Few Steps
---

A motivational coach worth their salt will do everything to convince you that
-- right after paying them -- you will succeed at whatever you are doing,
provided that you believe in yourself and try hard enough. The main difference
is that some are convinced you can achieve this in 5 steps, others may
recommend 7 steps instead. What no one seems to talk about instead is how to
achieve failure, be it in 5 or 7 steps. <!--more-->Perhaps that is because
failure is not an easy sell. A motivational coach must, after all, boast with
an impressive biography, having climbed Mt. Everest, and having shaken hands
with some of the great (but preferably uncontroversial) leaders of this world.

Who would listen to a motivational coach that instead guarantees you failure in
5 easy steps? People are quite ready to buy $20 best-selling self-help
books all just essentially reiterating the same point (_Eat that frog_, _The
power of habit_ or _Just do it_) over 300 long-winded pages. On the other
hand, having to read for 300 pages on how to _surely_ fail in your endeavours
just doesn't sit right with most seekers of self-help.

It is worth considering though, that exposing yourself to self-help and
motivational literature will expose you to the significant risk of falling for
[survivorship bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Survivorship_bias). By
concentrating all your attention on what some successful people did _right_,
you not only lose track of what they did not do _wrong_, but you also overlook
everyone who followed the same steps and did _not succeed_. After all, those
that did everything right and still failed to succeed will typically not sell
their life story rights any time soon.

So while we all like a good success story, I hope we can also agree that not
being exposed to stories of failure often enough can lead down a dangerous road
of blind optimism. And while we're at it, maybe you _really_ want to fail. I
mean, succeeding is difficult, but failing in a really spectacular way is a
true form. So, we do not only want to think about how to simply fail, we want
to think about how to fail elegantly, and perhaps even fail so elegantly that
we manage to successfully delude ourselves into thinking that success is just
around the corner! And what if I told you that you just need to follow a few
really simple tips? You just need some patience, a dash of luck, and you're
good to go. We want to identify the key techniques to failing.

# Constantly Doubt Yourself

When Sam Altman [speaks about how to be
successful](http://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), he recommends
having _almost too much self-belief_. He lists Elon Musk as an example, giving
him a tour of the SpaceX factory describing it as the place that will make
rockets that are going to eventually land on Mars. Now, if self-belief will
guide you on your road to success, not believing in yourself at all should
guide you on your road to failure. Let's try to put this into practice.

Imagine yourself in a meeting with your manager. You are asked how confident
you are of reaching the next milestone on time. Of course what you should
answer is that _things are great, and you will reach your goal on time and
under budget_.

But that would be too easy. Didn't you just recall that you found a bug in a
rarely used helper method that you wrote one year ago? And how someone wrote a
bug report saying that it would be completely fine if you fix it within the
next few weeks, as this bug is rarely triggered? Well let me tell you, the fact
that you are responsible for this mess is not only indicative of your lack of
coding skills. Not only are you unable to write the simplest piece of code --
the fact that someone else spotted this and not you is highly embarassing. How
can you ever contribute to this project in a meaningful way if all you do is
inconvenience your team and delay the schedule?

So clever you would of course respond

You see, that is because self-doubt is not productive, it doesn't seek
solutions. It only seeks to affirm your inner self-loathing

# Manage your time, poorly

# Trust, no one

# See opportunities to fail

Be convincingly pessimistic

# Teach the wrong way

Write blog posts like these and sell them as recipes to success
